                        ---------------------------
                        Bill's Cyberboard Utilities
                                  Tutorial
                        ---------------------------
                               Bill Gustafson
                                May 6, 1998
                        ---------------------------

This file gives examples on how to use the various utilites I've
written for making cyberboard game sets.  There are four programs -
annotate.exe, scntobmp.exe, bmptogtl.exe, and gtltobmp.exe.

After unzipping the files, look at the file generic.cfg in your
favorite text editor, and look at the documentation for annotate
(this is located in the file help.txt, and is also available at the
command-line by running annotate -h). The first part of generic.cfg
creates a blank counter bmp file, with a blue background, which is
placed in the bmp directory, and is called blue.bmp.  Note that this
bitmap assumes that bright green is set for the transparent color in
Cyberboard. This is then used to create the bluearm.bmp, blueinf.bmp,
and blueairb.bmp files.

run the following program at a dos prompt:

annotate -f generic.cfg

This will create the blue forces from the generic gamebox, as a set
of bitmaps called blueinf.bmp, bluearm.bmp, and blueairb.bmp.  It
also creates a file called bmptogtl.cfg, which lists off the bitmaps
for the bmptogtl program.  Look at these in your favorite bitmap
editor, if you want.

Next we'll create the gtl file for importing into Cyberboard.  This
is done by running the following at the DOS prompt:

bmptogtl

Since the annotate program created a bmptogtl.cfg you don't need to
specify it explicitly.  This creates a tile library file called
output.gtl, which consists of the blank counter, and the three unit
counters.  Import this into Cyberboard using the Load Tile library
file option under project (you have to have a tile image group
selected), and you should see the equivalent of the generic counters
for blue (they're not identical, because I use slightly different
NATO counters).

These two programs should make creating cyberboard counter much
easier.  I think that it's probably not any faster than creating them
by cutting and pasting in the cyberboard pixel editor, but I
personally don't have patience for that, so I made these programs to
do it from text files.  I also wrote two other programs while working
on this that may be helpful.  These are described next.

While you're working with Cyberboard export those bitmaps back out to
a new filename (using the save to tile library option) and then use
the gtltobmp program to split out the bitmaps again.

gtltobmp -f filename.gtl

where filename.gtl is the name you specified when you saved them.  Be
aware that none of these programs work with bitmaps that aren't
24-bit (like the original generic counters, for example).

This just leaves a demo of scntobmp.  Run the following:

annotate -f paste.cfg -ip ./

This creates a bitmap called panel.bmp which mimics a scanned bitmap. 
It has two rows of five counters.  It also overwrote the old
bmptogtl.cfg file.  

Look at scntobmp.cfg, and the documentation for scntobmp.  Now run:

scntobmp

and the infantry, armor and airborne bitmaps are split out, each with
it's own prefix.  Note that this also overwrites the bmptogtl.cfg
that annotate wrote, so that a new gtl file can be generated.

That's it.  I also re-wrote some programs for mosaicing images, that I
use for piecing maps together, but I'm not willing to work on them to
make them user-friendly, so they won't be released.








